alternate availability store schema (#2237)
paritytech/polkadot: roadmap/implementers-guide/src/node/utility/availability-store.md

For each of these data we have pruning rules that determine how long we need to keep that data available.

PoV hypothetically only need to be kept around until the block where the data was made fully available is finalized. However, disputes can revert finality, so we need to be a bit more conservative and we add a delay. We should keep the PoV until a block that finalized availability of it has been finalized for 1 day + 1 hour.

Availability chunks need to be kept available until the dispute period for the corresponding candidate has ended. We can accomplish this by using the same criterion as the above. This gives us a pruning condition of the block finalizing availability of the chunk being final for 1 day + 1 hour.

There is also the case where a validator commits to make a PoV available, but the corresponding candidate is never backed. In this case, we keep the PoV available for 1 hour.

> There may be multiple competing blocks all ending the availability phase for a particular candidate. Until finality, it will be unclear which of those is actually the canonical chain, so the pruning records for PoVs and Availability chunks should keep track of all such blocks.

Reviewer: We should keep the unfinalized chain somewhat longer for possible remote disputes.  We've two methods for doing this, either actually keep the data for a while, although not sure how long, or else later add some path for disputers to rerun distribution.  (ugh!)  We could just add some relatively short delay for the time being.

Also, nodes should never deletes anything for which they sign a dispute, maybe even making some backup outside the normal database structure.  We could postpone doing this however.

	st -> inc [label = "Block\nincluded"]
	st -> prn [label = "Stored block\ntimed out"]
	inc -> fin [label = "Block\nfinalized"]
  inc -> st [label = "Competing blocks\nfinalized"]
	fin -> prn [label = "Block keep time\n(1 day + 1 hour) elapsed"]
}
```

## Database Schema

We use an underlying Key-Value database where we assume we have the following operations available:
  * `write(key, value)`
  * `read(key) -> Option<value>`
  * `iter_by_prefix(prefix) -> Iterator<(key, value)>` - gives all keys and values in lexicographical order starting with `prefix`

We use this database to encode the following schema:

```
("available", CandidateHash) -> Option<AvailableData>
("chunk", CandidateHash, u32) -> Option<ErasureChunk>

> ("meta", CandidateHash) -> Option<CandidateMeta>

Author: I mean `Option` in the sense that `load_chunk(random_hash())` should produce `None`.

  - Note any new candidate included in the block. Update the `CandidateMeta` for each, performing a transition from `Unavailable` to `Unfinalized` if necessary. That includes removing the `"prune_by_time"` entry. Add the block hash and number to the state, if unfinalized. Add an `"unfinalized"` entry for the block and candidate.
  - The `CandidateEvent` runtime API can be used for this purpose.
  - TODO: load all ancestors of the head back to the finalized block so we don't miss anything if import notifications are missed. If a `StoreChunk` message is received for a candidate which has no entry, then we will prematurely lose the data.

On `OverseerSignal::BlockFinalized(finalized)` events:
  - for each key in `iter_by_prefix("unfinalized")`
    - Stop if the key is beyond `("unfinalized, finalized)`
    - For each block number f that we encounter, load the finalized hash for that block.
      - For each candidate that we encounter under `f` and the finalized block hash,

>         - Update the `CandidateMeta` to have `State::Finalized`. Remove the existing `"prune_by_time"` entry. If the previous state was `Unfinalized`, remove all `"unfinalized"` entries.

Author: Yeah, in fact there is no possible `"prune_by_time"` entry because there would only ever be an entry in `"unfinalized"` if it was in the `Unfinalized` state.

        - Register a `"prune_by_time"` entry for the candidate based on the current time + 1 day + 1 hour.
      - For each candidate that we encounter under `f` which is not under the finalized block hash,
        - Remove all entries under `f` in the `CandidateMeta`.

>         - If the `CandidateMeta` has state `Unfinalized` with an empty list of blocks, downgrade to `Unavailable` and 

Author: It is pruned because when we transition from `Unavailable -> Unfinalized`, we keep track of the same timestamp where we first stored the data. When we proceed from `Unfinalized -> Unavailable` we re-register the pruning under that same timestamp. 

I don't think we want to prune it directly because if the candidate appears in block `A1` but then `A2` is finalized, we still want the candidate to be able to appear in `B2`. So we don't want to greedily prune after A2 is finalized. This can not happen right now but could happen with contextual execution, where the candidate has relay-parent `G`. That is why I just downgrade to the `Unavailable` state for  clean-up to happen later.

```rust
G -> A1
G -> A2 -> B2
```

>         - If the `CandidateMeta` has state `Unfinalized` with an empty list of blocks, downgrade to `Unavailable` and 

Author: I realize that there is a trailing sentence here and have updated it.

	st -> inc [label = "Block\nincluded"]
	st -> prn [label = "Stored block\ntimed out"]
	inc -> fin [label = "Block\nfinalized"]
	inc -> st [label = "Competing blocks\nfinalized"]
	fin -> prn [label = "Block keep time\n(1 day + 1 hour) elapsed"]
}
```

## Database Schema

We use an underlying Key-Value database where we assume we have the following operations available:
  * `write(key, value)`
  * `read(key) -> Option<value>`

>   * `iter_by_prefix(prefix) -> Iterator<(key, value)>` - gives all keys and values in lexicographical order starting with `prefix`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * `iter_by_prefix(prefix) -> Iterator<(key, value)>` - gives all keys which start with `prefix` and associated values in lexicographical order 
```

Nit: previous phrasing implied that iteration includes keys subsequent to those which start with `prefix`. Also, clarify that `prefix` applies to the keys.

Additionally, there is exactly one `prune_by_time` entry which holds the candidate hash unless the state is `Unfinalized`. There may be zero, one, or many "unfinalized" keys with the given candidate, and this will correspond to the `state` of the meta entry.

## Protocol

Input: [`AvailabilityStoreMessage`][ASM]

Output:
- [`RuntimeApiMessage`][RAM]

## Functionality

For each head in the `activated` list:
  - Note any new candidates backed in the block. Update the `CandidateMeta` for each. If the `CandidateMeta` does not exist, create it as `Unavailable` with the current timestamp. Register a `"prune_by_time"` entry based on the current timestamp + 1 hour.
  - Note any new candidate included in the block. Update the `CandidateMeta` for each, performing a transition from `Unavailable` to `Unfinalized` if necessary. That includes removing the `"prune_by_time"` entry. Add the block hash and number to the state, if unfinalized. Add an `"unfinalized"` entry for the block and candidate.
  - The `CandidateEvent` runtime API can be used for this purpose.

>   - TODO: load all ancestors of the head back to the finalized block so we don't miss anything if import notifications are missed. If a `StoreChunk` message is received for a candidate which has no entry, then we will prematurely lose the data.

Reviewer 2: Within the guide, are we following the convention that TODOs require an associated issue?

Author: No, we haven't been yet.

We use this database to encode the following schema:

```
"LastFinalized" -> BlockNumber
("available", CandidateHash) -> Option<AvailableData>
("chunk", CandidateHash, u32) -> Option<ErasureChunk>
("meta", CandidateHash) -> Option<CandidateMeta>

("appears_in_unfinalized", BlockNumber, BlockHash, CandidateHash) -> Option<()>
("prune_by_time", Timestamp, CandidateHash) -> Option<()>
```

The meta information that we track per-candidate is defined as the `CandidateMeta` struct

```rust
struct CandidateMeta {
  state: State,
  data_available: bool,
  chunks_stored: Bitfield,
}

enum State {
  /// Candidate data was first observed at the given time but is not available in any block.
  Unavailable(Timestamp),
  /// The candidate was first observed at the given time and was included in the given list of unfinalized blocks, which may be
  /// empty. The timestamp here is not used for pruning.
  Unfinalized(Timestamp, Vec<(BlockNumber, BlockHash)>),
  /// Candidate data has appeared in a finalized block and did so at the given time.
  Finalized(Timestamp)
}
```

> We maintain the invariant that if a candidate has a meta entry, its available data exists on disk if `data_available` is true. All chunks mentioned in the meta entry are available.

Reviewer: Very good point.  We might've an only partially reconstructed block in which case we should keep all those pieces and eventually add some paths for sorting out the mess with our peers.  I donno how much of that exists.

Output:
- [`RuntimeApiMessage`][RAM]

## Functionality

For each head in the `activated` list:
	- Note any new candidates backed in the block. Update the `CandidateMeta` for each. If the `CandidateMeta` does not exist, create it as `Unavailable` with the current timestamp. Register a `"prune_by_time"` entry based on the current timestamp + 1 hour.
  - Note any new candidate included in the block. Update the `CandidateMeta` for each, performing a transition from `Unavailable` to `Unfinalized` if necessary. That includes removing the `"prune_by_time"` entry. Add the block hash and number to the state, if unfinalized. If the head is final already, just set the state to `State::Finalized`. Set pruning info accordingly.
  - The `CandidateEvent` runtime API can be used for this purpose.
  - TODO: load all ancestors of the head back to the finalized block so we don't miss anything if import notifications are missed. If a `StoreChunk` message is received for a candidate which has no entry, then we will prematurely lose the data.

On `OverseerSignal::BlockFinalized(finalized)` events:
  - for each key in `iter_by_prefix(("appears_in_unfinalized", last_finalized))`

>     - Stop if the key is beyond `("appears_in_unfinalized, finalized)`

Reviewer 3: that sounds like the block number should be in big endian so that lexicographical order yields values by ascension

Author: Yes

Author: Timestamps as well

}
```

## Database Schema

We use an underlying Key-Value database where we assume we have the following operations available:
  * `write(key, value)`
  * `read(key) -> Option<value>`
  * `iter_by_prefix(prefix) -> Iterator<(key, value)>` - gives all keys and values in lexicographical order starting from `prefix`

We use this database to encode the following schema:

```

> "LastFinalized" -> BlockNumber

Author: We actually don't need this; I thought prefix iterators worked differently than they do.
